### Set 3

#### 3.17

This one took me some fiddling to get right. As stated in the challenge
text itself, it's easy to get hung up on the idea of decrypting padding
bytes themselves. But the idea is to choose ciphertext byte values so as
to *force* valid padding in a "phantom" plaintext, then use the added
information to recover the actual plaintext bytes (padding bytes or no).

From the 2.16 answer text, CBC-mode decryption proceeds as follows:

    for ciphertext                    c = (c_0, c_1, c_2, .., c_l)
        block decryption w/key k      dec_k
        xor operator                  +

    let p_1 = dec_k(c_1) + c_0
        p_2 = dec_k(c_2) + c_1
        ..
        p_l = dec_k(c_l) + c_{l-1}

    in  plaintext                     p = (p_1, p_2, .., p_l)

So, the last plaintext byte can be described by:

    lb(p_l) = lb(dec_k(c_1) + c_{l-1})      (1)

Say one corrupts `c_{l-1}` (producing `c_{l-1}'`) by perturbing the last
byte, and then submits `(c_{l-1}', c_l)` to the padding oracle. The
padding oracle will internally compute:

    p_l' = dec_k(c_l) + c_{l-1}'

and then check its padding. We want to *force* the last byte of `p_l'`
to be 0x01, so we require that 1) the padding of `p_l'` validates, and
2) that this forced padding is not 0x0202 or 0x030303 or some other
scheme. We do this repeatedly until the padding validates as desired
(if we are unlucky and have forced some other padding, e.g. 0x0202, we
just treat that as a failure) yielding:

    lb(dec_k(c_l) + c_{l-1}')     = 0x01
    lb(dec_k(c_l)) + lb(c_{l-1}') = 0x01

so that:

    lb(dec_k(c_l)) = lb(c_{l-1}') + 0x01

and thus (using (1)), that:

    lb(p_l) = lb(dec_k(c_l)) + lb(c_{l-1)}
            = lb(c_{l-1}') + 0x01 + lb(c_{l}).

The same is then true for every other byte. For the penultimate byte,
for example, we want to *force* the penultimate byte of `p_l'` to be
0x02, so we also require that the last byte of `p_l'` be 0x02 in order
for its padding to validate. Each time we simply do this by manipulating
`c_{l-1}` appropriately.

`Cryptopals.Block.Attacks.paddingOracle` is a padding oracle, and the
`Cryptopals.Block.Attacks.paddingOracleAttack` function implements the
padding oracle attack (for arbitrary ciphertexts):

    > :{
    ghci| F.for_ [1..10] $ \_ -> putStrLn . show . M.fromJust =<<
    ghci|   fmap (CU.unpkcs7 . paddingOracleAttack) (paddingOracle gen)
    ghci| :}
    "000002Quick to the point, to the point, no faking"
    "000001With the bass kicked in and the Vega's are pumpin'"
    "000000Now that the party is jumping"
    "000000Now that the party is jumping"
    "000004Burning 'em, if you ain't quick and nimble"
    "000005I go crazy when I hear a cymbal"
    "000003Cooking MC's like a pound of bacon"
    "000002Quick to the point, to the point, no faking"
    "000003Cooking MC's like a pound of bacon"
    "000004Burning 'em, if you ain't quick and nimble"

#### 3.18

(FIXME, add binaries for these.)

CTR mode is trivial; the only thing to get right is really the specified
counter format. `Cryptopals.AES.decryptCtrAES128` (or its synonym,
`encryptCtrAES128`) can be used to retrieve our desired plaintext:

    > let Right cip = B64.decodeBase64 "L77na/nrFsKvynd6HzOoG7GHTLXsTVu9qvY/2syLXzhPweyyMTJULu/6/kXX0KSvoOLSFQ=="
    > decryptCtrAES128 0 "YELLOW SUBMARINE" cip
    "Yo, VIP Let's kick it Ice, Ice, baby Ice, Ice, baby "

#### 3.19 (and 3.20)

I used the same approach as was done in question 1.6, taking the
first 16 bytes of each ciphertext and then transposing them such that
each "block" has been single-byte XOR'd by something. Using a similar
scoring routine (see `Cryptopals.Block.Attacks.rnBest`) and some manual
fiddling, one can recover the keystream without much difficulty. Finding
the first 16 bytes exposes enough of the plaintexts that the remaining
bytes can be completed by hand, though I bailed out after I got the
gist of it:

    > let ks = BS.pack $ fmap (\(a, _, _) -> a) . rnBest) rnrotated
    > -- the resulting keystream needed some manual patching, but
    > -- results like "eighteeoth-centu" make it easy to do.
    > take 4 $ fmap (CU.fixedXor ks) rnscrypted
    ["I have met them ","Coming with vivi","From counter or ","Eighteenth-centu"]

(It turns out this is the way one is supposed to solve 3.20 too.  Whoops!)

#### 3.21

`Cryptopals.Stream.RNG.MT19937` implements the Mersenne Twister
(MT19937) PRNG in standard return-the-generator fashion:

    > let gen = seed 42
    > bytes 3 gen
    > ([1608637542,3421126067,4083286876],<MT19937.Gen>)

The only annoying thing about this problem was finding a test vector
to check the implementation against. I used the outputs on [this
guy's](https://create.stephan-brumme.com/mersenne-twister/) page;
the implementations he cites return signed 32-bit integers, but I
use (unsigned) Word32. One can convert results to e.g. Int32 with
fromIntegral to verify.

There's also a binary:

    $ mt19937 42 3
    1608637542
    3421126067
    4083286876

(N.b., the [original
paper](http://www.math.sci.hiroshima-u.ac.jp/m-mat/MT/ARTICLES/mt.pdf) on
the Mersenne Twister is very well-written and readable.)

#### 3.22

After the fourth or fifth time my children woke me up in the middle of
the night, I decided to just get up and pick at this stuff. I kicked off
this business somewhere around 5-6am:

    $ sleep $(shuf -i 40-1000 -n 1); ts=$(date +%s); \
      sleep $(shuf -i 40-1000 -n 1); mt19937 $ts 1
    1133750118

and then lay down again and fell asleep for a few hours. Using [this
timestamp calculator](https://www.unixtimestamp.com/) after the fact,
the timestamp is probably somewhere in the range of about \[1690702400,
1690708000\].  So, using:

    #!/usr/bin/env bash
    declare -i i
    i=1690702400
    while (($i < 1690708000)); do
      val=$(mt19937 $i 1)
      if (($val == 1133750118)); then
        echo "seed is $i"
        exit
      else
        i+=1
      fi
    done

we get:

    $ ./crackmt.sh
    seed is 1690706100

So, via the same timestamp calculator, it was seeded at Sun Jul 30 2023
06:05:00 GMT-0230 (heure d’été de Terre-Neuve).

#### 3.23

A Mersenne Twister outputs elements of its internal state transformed
by a tempering map. The state is perturbed every 624 iterations (the
"twist"), but if we have all 624 outputs generated from a constant
internal state, that state can be recovered by running the outputs
through the inverse tempering map.

The tempering transform (in Cryptopals.Stream.RNG.MT19937) can be
expressed by:

    temper :: Word32 -> Word32
    temper = e4 . e3 . e2 . e1 where
      e1 = rs u
      e2 = ls s b
      e3 = ls t c
      e4 = rs l

and the inverse transform by:

    untemper :: Word32 -> Word32
    untemper = n1 . n2 . n3 . n4 where
      n1 = rsinv u
      n2 = lsinv s b
      n3 = lsinv t c
      n4 = rsinv l

given the following salad of internal functions:

    ls :: Word32 -> Word32 -> Word32 -> Word32
    ls s m a = a `B.xor` (B.shiftL a (fi s) .&. m)

    rs :: Word32 -> Word32 -> Word32
    rs s a = a `B.xor` B.shiftR a (fi s)

    lsinv :: Word32 -> Word32 -> Word32 -> Word32
    lsinv s bm = loop 0 where
      loop j !b
        | j >= fi w = b
        | otherwise =
            let m = mask j (min (fi w - 1) (j + fi s - 1))
                x = ((m .&. b) `B.shiftL` fi s) .&. bm
            in  loop (j + fi s) (b `B.xor` x)

    rsinv :: Word32 -> Word32 -> Word32
    rsinv s = loop (fi w - 1) where
      loop j !b
        | j <= 0    = b
        | otherwise =
            let m = mask (max 0 (j - fi s + 1)) j
                x = (m .&. b) `B.shiftR` fi s
            in  loop (j - fi s) (b `B.xor` x)

    mask :: B.Bits b => Int -> Int -> b
    mask l h = loop l B.zeroBits where
      loop j !b
        | j > h = b
        | otherwise =
            loop (succ j) (B.setBit b j)

So we can run a generator for 624 iterations, capture the outputs, and
untemper them to recover the internal state for those 624 iterations
(with the caveat that the outputs we need to observe must occur absent
any intermediate twists of the internal state):

    > let gen = seed 42
    > let (bs, g) = bytes 624 gen
    > let cloned = Gen 624 (VU.fromList . fmap untemper $ bs)
    > fst (bytes 3 g)
    [108880612,791707097,4134543476]
    > fst (bytes 3 cloned)
    [108880612,791707097,4134543476]


