#### 6.41

For this one we'll just simulate the network stuff.
Cryptopals.RSA.Attacks implements 'umrOracle', the simulated
client/server interaction, as well as 'umrperturb', a function for
'perturbing' collected ciphertexts, and 'umrrecover', a function for
recovering plaintexts from the oracle's response.

The more interesting part of this challenge is understanding the modular
arithmetic going on. We have, for plaintext p and ciphertext c:

    c = p ^ e mod n
    p = c ^ d mod n

Now, encrypt a random 's' under the same pubkey. We have:

    t = s ^ e mod n
    s = t ^ d mod n

and now note that:

    (c t) mod n = (m ^ e mod n) (s ^ e mod n)
                = (m s) ^ e mod n

since exponentiation distributes over multiplication. If we have an
arbitrary decryption oracle, then we can get:

    p' = (c t) ^ d mod n
       = ((c ^ d mod n) (t ^ d mod n)) mod n
       = (p s) mod n

such that, for q the multiplicative inverse of s = t ^ d modulo n:

    p = p' q mod n.

So, let's generate a keypair and kick off the oracle. There are a lot of
really long lines here so I'll abbreviate the logs accordingly:

    > per <- keygen 1024
    > evalStateT (runEffect (umrOracle per)) mempty

It prints out the generated public key for convenience:

    (cryptopals) umr-oracle: running with public key
    Pub 3 22513321964659585055936315428684912055916908912276341574563352485..
    (cryptopals) umr-oracle: awaiting hex-encoded input

In another GHCi session we can mimic a user inputting their deepest, darkest
secrets:

    > let msg = "my secret crush is so-and-so"
    > let pub = <above logged pubkey>
    > let cip = encrypt pub msg

Hex-encoding the ciphertext and submitting it, the oracle spits out the
hex-encoded plaintext:

    (cryptopals) umr-oracle: decrypted text
    6d792073656372657420637275736820697320736f2d616e642d736f

and submitting it again (say, now, we're Mallory) yields nothing:

    (cryptopals) umr-oracle: rejecting request
    (cryptopals) umr-oracle: awaiting hex-encoded input

So now we go and adjust the ciphertext via 'umrperturb', which returns
the randomly generated number and the perturbed ciphertext (both of
which are way too long to print here):

    > gen <- MWC.createSystemRandom
    > (s, c') <- umrperturb pub cip gen

We hex-encode c' and submit it to the oracle again, this time receiving
a different hex-encoded plaintext back. This one is very long, since,
via our math above, it's a product of big integers:

    (cryptopals) umr-server: decrypted text
    c49c9dac3b7b4a86bf29eebafb3650469a5b91bf23c5339043ff9b72895953a21ff157f8..

Calling the hex-decoded bytestring p', we can feed it into 'umrrecover'
to crack the juicy secret:

    > umrrecover pub s p'
    "my secret crush is so-and-so"

Shame, shame.

#### 6.42

The idea here is simple, but clever: assemble something that, to a
sloppy verifier, looks to be validly PKCS#1 v1.5-encoded, put a bunch
of junk bytes at the end of it, and manipulate everything such that
the result is a cube (or at least has an approximate cube root). Then
calculate the approximate cube root and pass that off as a signature.

Cryptopals.RSA implements some functions for PKCS#1 v1.5 encoding (as
defined in [RFC-2313](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2313)),
and, in particular, the requisite broken verification. 'sign' and
'verify' implement a signature scheme using that encoding and SHA512.
'forge' in Cryptopals.RSA.Attacks implements the desired forging
function.

Let's test out the basic signing and verification functionality:

    > Keypair sec pub@(Pub e n) <- keygen 1024
    > let msg = "hi mom"
    > let (_, sig) = sign sec msg
    > verify pub msg sig
    True
    > verify pub "hi mum" sig
    False

and now the forgery, produced of course without the secret key:

    > let gis = forge n msg
    > verify pub msg gis
    True
    > verify pub "hi mum" gis
    False

#### 6.43

Parameter generation for DSA as detailed in
[FIPS.186-4](https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/FIPS/NIST.FIPS.186-4.pdf#
page=40) seems to be particularly annoying and unrewarding to implement,
so I didn't bother with it. The rest of the protocol is pretty standard
fare; Cryptopals.DSA implements 'keygen', 'sign', and 'verify'
functionality.

As for the attack here, if one knows the subkey/nonce he can trivially
recover the private key:

    s   = k^{-1} (h + x r)  (mod q)
    s k = h + x r           (mod q)
    x r = s k - h           (mod q)
    x   = r^{-1} (s k - h)  (mod q)

Since the nonce here is a 16-bit word, it can easily be brute-forced.
The 'fromsub' and 'recover' functions in Cryptopals.DSA.Attacks handle
this:

    > let sec@(Sec sk) = recover defaultParams rawmsg rawsig rawpub
    > CS.sha1 . BL.fromStrict . B16.encodeBase16' $ RSA.unroll sk
    0954edd5e0afe5542a4adf012611a91912a3ec16

We can log the nonce/subkey found (it's 16575) and hardcode that in the
'sign' function to check that we get the same signature as well:

    > sig <- sign defaultParams sec rawmsg gen
    > sig == rawsig
    True

#### 6.44

A reused nonce results in an identical 'r' in the DSA signature
produced, since 'r' depends only on the nonce and DSA domain parameters.
Then for two signatures s1 and s2, "integerized" digests h1 and h2, and
private key 'x', we have:

    s1 - s2 = k^{-1} (h1 + x r) - k^{-1} (h2 + x r)   (mod q)
            = k^{-1} (h1 + x r - h2 - x r)            (mod q)
            = k^{-1} (h1 - h2)                        (mod q)
          k = (s1 - s2)^{-1} (h1 - h2)                (mod q)

There are a few pairs of messages here with identical 'r' values. Shove
any pair of them into the Cryptopals.DSA.Attacks.recoverNonce function
to recover the nonce used:

    > m1
    "Listen for me, you better listen for me now. "
    > m2
    "Pure black people mon is all I mon know. "
    > let k = recoverNonce defaultParams sig1 sig2 h1 h2
    108994997653034620063305500641348549625
    > let Sec sk = fromsub defaultParams m1 sig1 k
    > CS.sha1 . BL.fromStrict . B16.encodeBase16' $ RSA.unroll sk
    ca8f6f7c66fa362d40760d135b763eb8527d3d52

